## Transcription  
### Excerpt from the audencia at New Orleans | January 23, 1790  
Present.do antemi oydia de la fha por las mismas partes  
sin firmas por expresar no sauenlo hasen Nueva Orleans  
veinte y tres a de enero de mil setecientas nov.ta años doy feé  
___ Perdomo.

Pedro Morsu y Baptista Bourgiñon, Indios mestiso y  
Sambo, ante V.S. en la mejor forma que haya lugar en drõ  
parecemos y Decimos: que alnuestro conbienes se nos  
admita Informacion de tgõs, y que los que presentaremos  
Juramentados en forma y sin diferirnos, declaren si nos  
conosen por hijos naturales de Cathalina Yndia natural, de  
nacio Chi.., y madre de la mestisa nombrada Maria Paget;  
cuyas declaraciones evaquadas que sean, se nos  
entreguen originales para usar del drõ que nos compreta:  
portanto.

### Excerpt from the testimony of Baptiste | January 30, 1790  
Present.do ante mi oy dia dela fha por la mismas parties  
forma por expresar no se venlo haser Nueva Orleans  
triente enero de mil setecientas nov.ta años doy feé___  
Perdomo.

Bautista Indio sambo, y esclavo de Manuel Bourgingon en  
la mejor forma que haya informa por lugar en dedrõ ante  
V.S. me presento y Digo: que me hallo supiendo la pena  
de cautiberio en poder del citado Manuel Bourgignon hace  
tiempo de dos años por haverme comprado ..te de Mma  
Laflor quien igual.te me tuvo asu serv.o baxo la esclavitud;  
y siendo siento y sabedor de la gracia que me conceden  
las leyes del Reyno, oponiendose entas Vigorosamente  
ala prievanza de la libertad que devengozar los de mi  
clase, y deseoso de disfrutar la como todo otro acreedor a  
ella, ocurro ala justificacion de Vuestro Señoría afin de que  
se sirva compeler al precitad Bourgignon me otorge  
respondiente carta de libertad, y para que el Tribunal  
venga en conocimiento de las juntas causas sobre las que  
fundar.

### Final ruling of the Court in favor of Baptiste | May 11, 1790  
Vistoy: libreso el Despacho Correspondiente con  
Ynsercion al Escrito aforar onze y treza y esta Provid.a al  
Comandante al Puesta de Ylinueses D. Manuel Perez i  
efecto sigue haya como parecer antesi a Manuel  
Bourgiñon y le obligue a que presente el titulo de  
adquisición que tiene de Baptista Indio, y confiando por el  
haver sido vendido des pues del siete de Diciembre del  
año posado de mil seteciento y sesenta y nueve de le  
obligara al citado Bourguignon a entregarte su  
cartadeventa dejandole el orõ. avaluo para que lo repita  
con tia q.ta haya lugar ellicencia des pesos recividos.  
Estevan Miró. Juz.do Justicias.  

Proveyolo el Sr Dn Estevan Miro Brigadier alos R.s Extõz  
Ciud.x é Ynt.e de esta Prov.a por dela que lo firmio en  
onze de mayo demil setecientos Noventa años___  Rafael  
Perdomo, Ño Publo.  

Nn En dho dia lo hize vauen aDn Antonio Mendez doy  
feé___ Perdomo.  



## Translation  
### Excerpt from the audencia at New Orleans | January 23, 1790  
Presented before me today are the same parties  
without signatures, for they do not know how to sign. New Orleans,  
23 January 1790. I hereby certify,  
Perdomo.

Pierre Morsu and Baptiste Bourguignon, mestizo and  
zambo Indians, before Your Lordship in the appropriate way as is required by the law,  
we appear and swear: that we agree to  
admit testimony from witnesses, and that what they will present  
and swear will be done without deferring to us, they declare that  
they know us to be the natural sons of Cathalina, a native Indian,  
from the Chise nation, and mother of the mestiza named Marie Paget;  
whose declarations that are provided, were originally given to us to be used lawfully as it is understood by us:  
so thusly.

### Excerpt from the testimony of Baptiste | January 30, 1790  
Present before me on this date the same party without  
signature, for they do not know how to sign. New Orleans,  
30 January 1790. I hereby certify,  
Perdomo.

Baptiste, zambo Indian and slave of Manuel Bourguingon,  
in the appropriate way as required by law I report before  
Your Lordship, present myself and say: that I know the  
penalty of captivity under the power of the aforementioned  
Manuel Bourguignon who two years ago bought me from  
Madame LeFleur who also had me in her service under the  
same slavery; and being sorry and knowing the grace  
granted to me by the laws of the Kingdom, while vigorously  
opposing the deprivation of liberty afforded to those of my  
class, and desiring to enjoy it as any other guaranteed it,  
may Your Lordship to compel the aforementioned  
Bourguignon at that price to grant me in response a  
certificate of freedom, and for the Court to be aware of the  
cases jointly filed on which this is founded.  

### Final ruling of the Court in favor of Baptiste | May 11, 1790  
I see and release the handwritten warrant inserted  
measuring eleven by thirteen along with this ruling to the  
Commander at Puesta de Ylinueses (San Luis de  
Luisiana), Don Manuel Pérez, so that Manuel Bourguignon  
will be brought before you and be compelled to present the  
title of acquisition that he holds for the Indian Baptiste, and  
trusting he was sold after December 7 of the year 1769,  
the aforementioned Bourguignon will be obligated to give  
over his letter of sale to you leaving the gold appraised as  
is required by the fortieth day from which point the freedom  
papers are given. Estevan Miró, Justice of the Court.  

Provided by His Excellency Governor Estebán Miró,  
Brigadier General of the Royal City’s Army and Intendante  
of this Province, which he signed on 11 May 1790. Rafael  
Perdomo, Notary Public.  

Notarized on the said day that it was served to Don  
Antonio Mendez. I hereby certify, Perdomo.

