## Transcription  
dejeuner Ensuite ledit Leonard S’es Retiré [tear in page]   
a la maison et ledit Janot s’en fut aux Champs  
Continuer son ouvrage, et un moment apres  
Voit revenir son maitre avec un fusil  
Menacant ledit negre de tirer sur lui   
Et lui disant puisque tu as dit que tu  
Voulais me tuer il faut que je te tue  
A quoi ledit Janot repliqua je n’ai jamais  
Eu la pensée de cela sy fait bien dit ledit  
Leonard Car ma femme me la dit et bien  
Mr. Lui dit le negre si vous voulez me  
Tuer me voila je ne m’en irai pas pour  
Cela vous etes le maitre  
  
Interogé s’il n’a pas dit a son maitre  
qu’il scavoit qui a tué son voisin Mr. Corbin  
A repondu que non quil n’a jamais parle de  
Cela a son maitre et qu’il ne connoit point   
Celui qui a tué Mr. Corbin  
Interogé s’il n’a pas oüi dire que le Sr. Corbin  
Ait ete tué   
A repondu que non  
Interogé s’il n’a pas ete d’un Badinage   
qui se fit chez le Sr. Corbin deux mois  
avant sa mort.     
  
A repondu qu’il y a assisté mais qu’il n’y  
Badinoit point  
  
Interoge si L’on y Chanta des chansons   
  
[Prat]  
  
[fin de la page]  
  
Negres Et en cette langue la mort [tear in page]  
de Sr. Corbin  
  
A dit que l’on chanta negre mais qu’il n’en– [tear in page]  
pas la langue des negres fonds qui E– [tear in page]  
Ceux qui chantoint   
  
Interogé sy l’on versa de l’eau ou de l’eau de vie?  
Sur la tete dud. (dudit) Sr. Corbin En chantant  
Et ce que cela voiloit dire  
A repondue qu’il n’a point Veu Cela  
Interogé si les Negres du Sr. Corbin  
Scavent qui la tué  
  
a dit qu’il n’en a aucune Connoissance Et que   
S’il scavoit qui peut avoir tué led. (ledit) Corbin  
ou qu’il Connoit des Gens qui le scavent  
Il l’auroit deja dit  
  
Interogé s’il a vu des Rats attaches  
Dans le desert dudit Sr. Corbin au haut de  
Longues Cannes s’il scait qui les avoit   
mis la et a quel dessein  
A Repondu qu’il n’en scait rien de tout  
Cela et qu’il n’a pas ete dans ce desert  
 Il a adjouté que ce jour de la fete dieu  
Que ledit Sr. Corbin s’est perdu il a passé  
La journée chez le Sr. Chaperon et le lendemain  
Et jours suivants il a toujours travaille  
Avec son maitre  
  
[Prat]  
[fin de la page]  
  
Interogé s’il connoissance que dans le temps  
De la mort du dit Sr. Corbin il y avoit de   
Ce coté la des negres marons  
A Repondu que non qu’il ne scait point  
S’il y en avoit  
  
Interogé s’il de l’autre coté de l’eau il  
N’y avoit pas un negre maron qui est  
Retourné chez son maitre  
  
A dit que les negres de Livet furent marons  
Quinze jours après la perte du dit Sr. Corbin  
Interogé s’il n’a pas ete maron lui interogé  
A dit qu’il y a environ cinq semaines il s’en  
Fut maron et qu’il demeura huit jours  
dehors et que ce fut parce que sa metresse  
Vouloir l’emmener à la Ville pour le faire  
fouetter pour les mauvaises parolles et  
Raisonnements qu’elle disoit qu’il avoit  
Tenu à l'égard de son Mary  
Qui est tout ce qu’il a dit scavoir  
Lecture a luy faite du present interrogatoire  
A dit que ses reponses contiennent verite  
Y a persisté et declaré ne scavoir Ecrire  
N’y signer de ce enquis suivant l’ordonnance  
  
Prat [signature]  
  
Soit communiqué au procureur general   
Du Roy ce 10^e 7^bre 1743 Prat [signature]  
  
Vu le present interrogatoire Je requiere pour le Roy que ledit  
Janot soit fouette jusqu’a ce qu’il avoue? ce qu’il a dit a son  
Maitre a la nouvelle orleans le dix^e (dixieme) Septembre 1743 Fleuriau [signature]  
  
  

## Translation  
Have lunch, then the said Leonard retired [tear in page]   
to the house, and the said Janot went out in the fields   
to continue his work, and a moment Later   
he saw his Master coming back with a gun   
threatening to shoot at the said negre  
And saying to him that “since you said you   
wanted to kill me, I have to kill you.”  
To which the said Janot replied that “I never   
had the thought of that,” “well done,” said, the said   
Leonard “since my wife told it to me,” and “well  
Monsieur,” Said the negre “if you want to   
kill me, here I am and I am not going anywhere, for   
this you are the master.”  
  
Asked if he had not said to his master   
That he knew who he had killed his neighbor Mr. Corbin  
Responded that no, that he has never spoken of   
that to his master and that he did not know   
The one who had killed Mr. Corbin  
Asked if he had not heard that the Sr. Corbin  
Has been killed  
Responded no  
Asked if he had not been part of a “banter”  
that happened at Sir Corbin’s house two months  
before his death.  
  
Responded that he was present there but that he  
did not “banter” around there  
  
Asked if negre songs were sung there  
  
[Prat]  
  
[end of the page]  
  
And in this language the death [tear in page]  
Of Sir Corbin  
  
Said that there was negre singing but that he [tear in page]  
not the language of the Fon negres who [tear in page]  
those who sang  
  
Asked if one poured water or alcohol  
On the head of the said Sr. Corbin while singing  
And what that means  
Answered that he did not see it  
Asked if the negres of Sir Corbin  
Know who killed him  
  
Said that he has no knowledge of it and that  
If he knew who may have killed the said Corbin  
or if he knew the people who know that  
He would have said that already  
  
Asked if he saw Rats attached  
in the land of the said Sir Corbin, at the top of  
long canes, if he knows who had   
put them there and for what purpose  
  
Answered that he does not know anything at all   
About that and that he was not on that land  
He added that the day of the feast of god  
That the said Sir Corbin got lost, he spent  
The day at Sir Chaperon’s house and the next day  
and following days he had been working always  
With his master   
  
[Prat]  
  
[end of the page]  
  
Asked if he knows that during the time  
of the death of the said Sir Corbin there were  
in that direction any runaway negres  
Answered that no, that he does not know  
If there were  
  
Asked if the other side of the water there  
wasn’t there a runaway negre who   
returned to his master’s place.  
  
Said that the negres of Livet went marons (ran away)  
Fifteen days after the loss of the said Sir Corbin  
Interrogated if he has not been himself a runaway   
Said that about five weeks ago he had  
Went maron (run away) and that he had remained eight days  
away and that it was because of his mistress  
Wanting to take him to the city to have him  
Whipped for the bad speaking and  
Reasoning which she said that he had  
held towards her husband  
  
  
Which is all that he said to know  
Reading to him of this present interrogation  
  
Said that his answers contained the truth,  
Persisted in this and declared not knowing how to write  
Nor to sign of this inquired following the ordinance  
  
Prat [signature]  
  
To be communicated to the Attorney General  
Of the King this tenth of September 1743 Prat [signature]  
  
Saw the present interrogatory, I require for the King that the said  
Janot be whipped until he confesses to what he has said to his  
Master in New Orleans this tenth September 1743 Fleuriau [signature]
