---
name: Eva Baham
image: /assets/figures/headshots/drbaham.jpg
---
is an assistant professor of history at Dillard University. She focuses on social and cultural histories, primarily on Louisiana’s African American communities. In doing so, she meshes historical and genealogical methods. Her work may best be described as historical eclecticism, as she studies and researches differing aspects of culture and their inter-relationships and inter-connections. Her most recent book publication is African Americans in Covington (Louisiana); a book chapter, “The Grand Rallying Point: Methodists, Congregationalists, Baptists, Episcopalians, and Jews Forge a Lesson and a Legacy in Interfaith Cooperation;” journal articles, “In the Moral Vineyard to Dispel the Darkness of Ignorance: African American Baptists in Louisiana;” and “Searching for Duplin and Zoe Amid the Contradictions of Being Slave and Free.” She has consulted on two documentaries on African Americans in Louisiana. Prior to her appointment at Dillard University, Dr. Baham taught at Southern University, Baton Rouge, as an associate professor of history. She teaches world and United States history, and the African diaspora. She also conducts genealogical research of south Louisiana families under the umbrella of her organization, Université sans murs. Baham will also be presenting at the 2022 AHA on a panel organized by Johnson and with participation from Research Team Leader Villarreal titled " Black Life in Spanish New Orleans: New Research and Insights."