---
name: Eva Baham
jobtitle: Community, Ethics, and Accountability Advisor
image: /assets/figures/headshots/drbaham.jpg
---
is a former assistant professor of history at Dillard University and an associate professor at Southern University, Baton Rouge. She focuses on social and cultural histories, primarily on Louisiana’s African American communities. In doing so, she meshes historical and genealogical methods. Her work may best be described as historical eclecticism, as she studies and researches differing aspects of culture and their inter-relationships and inter-connections. Her most recent publication, "A Genealogist and a Historian Walk into the Archives: Search for My People in Louisiana," published in Louisiana History: The Journal of the Louisiana Historical Association. The article received "The President's Memorial Award" for the best article published in the 2022 Journal. Additionally, Veritenews.org published her article, "Secret, Subtle, Surreptitious Resistance was a Weapon for Enslaved Women."   Publications also include the text, African Americans in Covington (Louisiana); a book chapter, “The Grand Rallying Point: Methodists, Congregationalists, Baptists, Episcopalians, and Jews Forge a Lesson and a Legacy in Interfaith Cooperation;” journal articles, “In the Moral Vineyard to Dispel the Darkness of Ignorance: African American Baptists in Louisiana;” and “Searching for Duplin and Zoe Amid the Contradictions of Being Slave and Free.” She has consulted on two documentaries on African Americans in Louisiana, and the soon-to-be released, "Gulfside Assembly: A 100-Year Chautauqua Retreat for Blacks on the Gulf Coast of Mississippi". Prior to her appointment at Dillard University, Dr. Baham taught at Southern University, Baton Rouge, as an associate professor of history. She teaches world and United States history, and the African diaspora. She also conducts genealogical research of south Louisiana families under the umbrella of her organization, Université sans murs. Baham will also be presented at the 2022 AHA on a panel organized by Johnson and with participation from Research Team Leader Villarreal titled " Black Life in Spanish New Orleans: New Research and Insights." She is a founding member of the Charles Deslondes Branch (New Orleans) of the Association for the Study of African-American History.