---
name: Eola Dance
image: /assets/figures/headshots/eola.jpg
---
daughter, mother, sister, aunt, friend, artist, and ethnohistorian with more than 20 years of federal experience in history, art, culture, and preservation; currently serving as Superintendent of Fort Monroe National Monument in Hampton, VA. Eola is also founder of VISION, a global virtual community committed to purpose driven living mind, body, and soul. Eola was awarded the 2021 Trailblazer Award by the Greening Youth Foundation, and is committed to preparing the next generation for careers in environmental stewardship, archeology, and museums. A recognized leader in descendant community engagement, Eola has worked at the
intersection of race, gender, and class in research, preservation, and storytelling since 2001. Eola uses arts-based approaches in discussing difficult topics in social history significant to underrepresented communities with specialized focus on Indigenous and African American experiences. She received a BA in History from Southern University A & M College in 2001, an MA in Historic Preservation from Savannah College of Art and Design in 2015, and a graduate certificate in Environmental Policy from The George Washington University in 2017. A 2014 attendee to Gilder Lehrman Center for the Study of Slavery, Resistance and Abolition at Yale University’s Public History Summer Session, Eola has developed programs and worked with communities in researching the people and history of the Underground Railroad since 2001. Currently, a PhD candidate at Howard University, Eola’s area of concentration is US History with a minor in African Diaspora and Public History. Her research focuses on race and identity in 17th Century America, the evolution of racialized slavery, the legacy of 1619, and opportunities for healing and reconciliation within and across communities. Eola is a proud member of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc. initiated in the Beta Psi chapter in the fall of 2000 and is a current member of the Xi Omega chapter. In her free time Eola can be found exploring nature trails with her three sons, jogging, doing yoga, or painting.