---
name: Laura Rosanne Adderley
jobtitle: Community Engagement Team Member
image: /assets/figures/headshots/dradderley.jpg
---
is Associate Professor of History at Tulane University in New Orleans where she specializes in the History of the African Diaspora; the Atlantic Slave Trade, Black Enslavement in the Americas, Caribbean History & African-American History. She holds a B.A. in History and Latin American Studies from Yale University and a Ph.D. in History from the University of Pennsylvania. Her research focuses the comparative history of Black enslavement, particularly during the 19th century, and the processes related slave trade abolition and emancipation. Most of her research has concerned British slave trade suppression and the Africans affected by it. However, because of the nature of the 19th-century Atlantic slave trade, this research has various transnational components across multiple colonial and geographic boundaries, including most significantly interaction between the British and Spanish colonized Caribbean and North America. She is author of the 2006 book *“New Negroes from Africa”: Slave Trade Abolition and Free African Settlement in the Nineteenth-Century Caribbean*. Her current book project is tentatively entitled *Aduma’s Colonial Archive: African Social Networks and Caribbean Abolition*. Her most recent publication is a co-authored article with Sharla Fett entitled “Slave Trade Refugees and Imperial Agendas” in a 2022 edited volume on Post-Coloniality and Forced Migration with Bristol University Press. At Tulane, Professor Adderley is affiliated with the Africana Studies Program, the Stone Center for Latin American Studies. She also serves on the board of the Amistad Research Center and, with Nell Bolton, co-directs a public history project related to the life and legacy of African American educator and reformer, Frances Joseph Gaudet.
