---
name: Nyla Williams
image: /assets/figures/headshots/nyla.jpg
---
is a scholar, researcher, and rising senior at Xavier University of Louisiana. Majoring in History with a minor in Art Management, Nyla has a deep passion for preserving and interpreting Black American historical narratives. She is a Student Research Assistant at the Xavier University Archives and Special Collections, where she processes, preserves, and catalogs collections. Nyla also re-established and is the current president of the Xavier University History Club. Under her leadership the club has become partners with local archives and museums to introduce students to careers in public history.

Nyla is a member of LifexCode in both the Keywords for Black Louisiana project and the Diaspora Solidarities Lab. Nyla has been an assistant editor to the Keywords project where she has revised the titles of historical documents to reflect appropriate 21st century language descriptors of marginalized people. In the Diaspora Solidarities Lab, she has worked as a Solidarity Fellow within the microlab *Black Louisiana History Incubators* which preserves Black Louisiana history by promoting it to Generation-Z audiences.

Occasionally, Nyla provides freelance research, and has provided services to book authors, documentary directors, and fortune 500 companies. Her most recent project was in partnership with the Southern University at New Orleans history department and Louisiana Public Broadcasting to produce the forthcoming film *Pontchartrain Park Pioneers*, a documentary about the history of one of New Orleans’ wealthiest Black neighborhoods. Looking ahead, Nyla plans to pursue a Master's degree in Library Information Science. Her goal is to continue safeguarding cultural heritage and promoting scholarly inquiry through archival practices.
