## French Transcription  
  
14229  
  
Le Publication dun Execution a lordre  
du Monsieur de Salmon Commissaire ordonnateur  
de la Marine et Premier juge au Conseil Superieure  
de Cette province En datte du 21 du present mois  
a la Requete. du Sr. Dausseville procurant aux biens  
Vacants en comme chargé de la Succession de feu Mr. Coustilhas  
Il va’ Etre procedé tout presentement a la vente Et  
adjudication d'une negre nommé politte appartenait a ladite  
Succession Infirme suivant le Certifficat de Mr. Pratt  
Medecin du Roy En datte du 21 du present mois, ou  
toutes personnes Seront Recü ay Esclaves Et payer  
Comptant le prix de leur adjunction Sans Retour ay  
Garantye que pour S’areté de lacquisition auque [tear in page]  
Personne N'En Ignore a la Nlle orleans ce 29 Janvier  
1741  

[tear in page] publié Et affiché par maj. marin le normand suppliant  
Sousigné ledit Jour mois Et an que dessus  
				Le Normand	
  


## English Translation  
  
14229

The Publication of an Execution to the Order of Mr Salmon Commissaire ordonnateur of the Navy and First Judge of the Superior Council of this Province Dated the 21st of the present month at the Request of Sr. Dausseville procurer of vacant estates in charge of the Estate of the late Mr. Coustillas It will be proceeded immediately to the sale and sale at auction of a negre named Politte belonging to the said Estate In service according to the Certificate of Mr. Prat Doctor of the King On the date of the 21st of the present month, all persons shall be received as slaves and paid in cash the price of their adjunction without return as a guarantee only for the termination of the ____ at New Orleans this January 29, 2741.

___ published and posted by (major?) Marin Le Normand supplicant Undersigned the said day, month and year as above 

						Le Normand