# Summary  
Julia Fortier, a free Black woman, files a freedom suit to compel the fair valuation of Medery, who is enslaved by Antoine Joseph Picquery, and successfully purchases his liberty. This case is an example of *coartación*, a process enslaved people and their kinfolk used to force their owners to provide them with an estimate of their value so they could fund their own self-purchase.  
  
[Transcription](#transcription-spanish-diplomatic)  
[Translation](#translation-english-modern)  
  
## Transcription (Spanish, diplomatic)  
  
[folio 0 recto] [digital 2]   
  
  
Año De_1793H  
  
Julia Fortier solicitando dar la  
libertad a el Negro nombrado Mendery  
esclabo de D<sup>n</sup> Juan Piquery por el  
Precio De su estimación______  
  
~~<u>N.<sup>o</sup> 18</u>~~  
  
N.vv58  
  
[moderno, a lápiz] March 11, 1793   
[en lápiz rojo de archivo] 2999  
  
Juez  
______________  
VS<sup>or</sup> Gov.<sup>or</sup> \}                  
  
S<sup>no</sup>  
__________  
Pedesclaux  
  
  
[f. 0 verso] [dig.3]  
  
  
[en blanco]  
  
  
[f. 1r] [dig.4]  
  
  
Julia Fortier Negra libre vecina de esta  
ciudad en la mejor forma que haya lugar  
en dřo ante V.S parezco y digo; que deseando   
rescatar dela Esclavitud en quese halla  
el Negro Medery Esclavo de M.<sup>r</sup> Piquery  
sup.<sup>co</sup> a V.S. se sirva mandar que el dhe su  
Amo, nombre un Estimador de su parte, pa=  
ra que con el que nombre que los es D.<sup>n</sup> Vicen   
te Fanguy, procedan a la Estimacion de   
dho Negro Medery Portanto_____   
A V.S. Sup.<sup>co</sup> haverlo por nombrado proveer y mandar como pido Con Justicia costas  
Juro no es de malicia &<sup>a</sup>___  
  
Por Julia Fortier  
[Firmado:] Felipe Guinault  
  
  
Por presentada: y à tento à ser  
para el fin que se propone de la  
~  
  
  
[f. 1v] [dig.5]  
  
  
Libertad del Negro Medery, escla  
vo de M.<sup>r</sup> Piquery, la Estima-  
cion que se solicita de la persona  
de aquel, procedase desde luego à  
ella; para la qual se ha por nom-  
brada por esta parte de Aprecia-  
dor à d.<sup>n</sup> Vicente Fanguy à quien  
se hara saber para su acceptacion,  
Y Juramento que se comete, dandose  
noticia de esta Providencia al Amo  
del Esclavo, paraq<sup>e</sup> dentro de segundo  
dia nombre otro Perito de su satis-  
faccion con apercebimiento que des  
no verificando, se hara de oficio.___  
  
[Rubrica, Carondelet]    [Rubrica, Vidal]  
  
Proveyolo el S.<sup>r</sup> Baron de Carondelet  
Caballero Dela religion de S.<sup>n</sup> Juan  
Coronel Delos E.<sup>s</sup> extos, Governador e  
Yntendente Grãl vice Patrono Real  
~  
  
  
[f. 2r] [dig.6]  
  
  
ellas Prov.<sup>~</sup> de la Luisiana, y Florida  
Occidental e Ynspector de las tropas  
veteranas, y milicias De estas por  
S.M. Con dictamen del S.<sup>r</sup> D. D. Nicolas  
Maria Vidal teniente Governador  
y Auditor de Grrã De esta dha Prov.<sup>a</sup>  
y Asesor gràl del Governo De esta por  
S.M. y lo rubricanas en la cuidad de la  
Nueba Orleans a onze de Marso  
De mil setecientos, noventa, y tres años=  
  
[Firmado:] Pedro Pedesclaux  
[Rubrica, Pedesclaux]  
E<sup>sno</sup>Pub.<sup>co</sup>  
  
Nf   En dho dia lo hace saber a Julia Fortier,   
Negra libre doy fee___________  
  
  
[Firmado:] Pedesclaux E<sup>sno</sup>  
[Rubrica, Pedesclaux]  
  
Diligencia \} En el mismo dia yo el S.<sup>no</sup> lo hace por  
D.<sup>n</sup> Josef Coupery, y se me informo hacia  
su rendencia en el cargo, para que  
conne lo porpo por diligencia, doy feé==  
  
  
[Firmado:] Pedesclaux   E<sup>sno</sup>  
[Rubrica, Pedesclaux]  
  
N.Acep.<sup>n</sup>   
y juram<sup>to</sup> \}  
En el mismo dia mes, y año yo el S.<sup>no</sup>  
~  
  
  
[f .2v] [dig.7]  
  
  
hice saber a D.<sup>n</sup> Vincente Fanguy el  
nombramiento de estimador que  
por el decreto que antecedo sele hase,  
quien acepto, y Juro por Dios y un a  
cruz segun drõ Deproceder bien  
y fielmente en el encargo que sele  
hase, y lo firmo, doy fee________  
  
[Firmado:] V=<sup>te</sup> Fangui  
  
Antemi  
[Firmado:] Pedro Pedesclaux E<sup>no</sup>pub.<sup>co</sup>  
[Rubrica, Pedesclaux]  
  
  
[f. 3r] [dig.8]  
  
  
Julia Fortier negra libre vecina de esta   
Ciudad en los autos q<sup>e</sup> sigo contra Don Jph<sup>~</sup>  
Piquery sobre conseguir la libertad del negro__  
Mederie su esclavo por el precio de su justa ta-  
sacion ante VS digo q<sup>e</sup> sele ha mandado al ante dho   
nombrase tasador de su parte y en atencion a__  
vendir al campo a una legua de esta Ciudad del   
otro lado del rio, VS se ha de servir mandar dela  
libre boleta De comparendo cometida su intimacion   
a qualquier persona habil por tanto  
AVS Suplico se sirva proveer y mandar  
como pido con Justicia costas juro y para   
ello &  
  
  
  
Por Julia Fortier   
[Firmado:] Felipe Guinault  
  
Como lo pide  
[Rubrica, Carondelet]    [Rubrica, Vidal]  
  
Proveida el Sor Baron de Carondelet  
Cav.<sup>ro</sup> de San Juan Coronel de  
los reales Extos_____  
  
  
[f. 3v] [dig.9]  
  
  
Gov.<sup>or</sup> Int.<sup>e</sup> grãl, y Vice Patrono  
real de las Pro.<sup>~</sup> de la Luisiana  
Con dictamen del S<sup>or</sup> d.d, Nicolas  
Ma Vidal Th.<sup>e</sup> Gov.<sup>or</sup> Auditor de grrã  
y Asesor grãl del Gov.<sup>o</sup> y lo ru-  
bricason en la N<sup>a</sup> Orleans  
à Treze de Marzo de mil  
Set.<sup>s</sup> nuvento y tres  
  
[Firmado:] Pedro Pedesclaux Es<sup>no</sup>pub.<sup>co</sup>  
[Rubrica, Pedesclaux]  
  
  
N.<sup>f</sup> En dho dia lo his Saver à Julia  
Fortier doy fe_____  
  
  
[Firmado:] Pedesclaux E<sup>no</sup>pub.<sup>co</sup>  
[Rubrica, Pedesclaux]  
  
  
<u>Nota</u>,, Fue en el mismo dia se libro   
la boleta q<sup>e</sup> se mando y lo  
entreguè a la parte doy  
Fe__________________  
  
[Firmado:] Pedesclaux E.<sup>sno</sup>  
[Rubrica, Pedesclaux]  
  
  
[f. 3r] [dig.10]  
  
  
[en blanco]  
  
  
## Translation (English, modern)  
  
[page #1] [digital 2]  
  
  
[In the] Year of 1793 Julia Fortier, requesting the freedom of the negro named Mendery, esclavo of Don Juan Piquery, for the price of his [fair] valuation..  
  
~~N.<sup>o</sup> 18~~  
  
N.vv58  
  
[modern, in pencil] March 11, 1793  
[in archival red pencil] 2999  
  
Judge  
______________  
Your Lord Governor \}  
  
Notary  
__________  
Pedesclaux  
  
  
[p. #2] [dig.3]  
  
  
[blank]  
  
  
[p. #2] [dig.4]  
  
  
Julia Fortier, *negra* libre, resident of this city, in the way which is necessary by law, before Your Lordship, I appear and say that wishing to rescue from the slavery in which the *negro* Medery, *esclavo* of Mr. Piquery, is kept, I beg of Your Lordship to order that of his said master, to appoint an estimator on his behalf, so that, with which the named, *Don* Vicente Fanguy, they may proceed to the estimation of the aforesaid *negro* Medery. Thusly, I beg Your Lordship to appoint, provide and order as I ask with due justice. I swear [that I have] no malice, etc.  
  
For Julia Fortier  
[Signed:] Felipe Guinault  
  
  
Motion filed: And in order to achieve the purpose proposed of the  
  
  
[p. #3] [dig.5]  
  
  
liberty of the negro Medery, *esclavo* of Mr. Piquery, the estimate,  which is requested by this person [on his behalf], shall proceed immediately, [and] for which [purpose] has been appointed for this party as appraiser *Don* Vicente Fanguy who will be notified for his acceptance and oath, which [he shall] commit, [and] give notice of this provision to the master of the slave, so that within two days, he may appoint another expert of his satisfaction, with the warning that if this is not done, it will be executed *ex officio*.  
  
[Rubric, Carondelet]    [Rubric, Vidal]  
  
Thus ordered: [By] the Lord Baron de Carondelet, Knight of the Religious [Order] of St. John [of Jerusalem], Colonel of the Royal Armies, Governor and Intendant-General, Royal Vice-Patron  
  

[p. #4] [dig.6]  
  
  
of this Province of Louisiana and West Florida, and Inspector-General of all Veteran Troops and [Infantry] Militias by  His Majesty, with dictum of Lord Dr. *Don* Nicolas Maria Vidal, Lieutenant-Governor and Civil Legal Advisor of this said Province, and Advisor General of this Government by His Majesty. And they signed in the City of New Orleans on [the] 11th of March of the year seventeen-hundred ninety-three.  
  
[Signed:] Pedro Pedesclaux  
[Rubric, Pedesclaux]  
Notary Public  
  
  
Notarized: On the said day I made known to Julia Fortier, *negra libre*. I attest,  
  
[Signed:] Pedro Pedesclaux, Notary  
[Rubric, Pedesclaux]  
  
  
Proceedings \} On the same day, month, and year, I, the notary, have made [it known] to *Don* Joseph Coupery, and [I] having been informed [that] he has dispensed of his charge, so with that it is done by due process. I attest,  
  
[Signed:] Pedesclaux, Notary   
[Rubric, Pedesclaux]  
  
  
Notarized, accepted, and ordered             \}   
On the same day, month, and year, I, the notary,                                       


[p. #5] [dig.7]  
  
  
made known to *Don* Vicente Fanguy the appointment as appraiser that is made to him by the above decree, who accepted and swore [oath] by God and the Cross, according to the law, to proceed well and faithfully in the task that is given to him and sign [as such]. I attest,  
  
[Signed:] Vicente Fanguy  
  
  
Before me  
[Signed:] Pedro Pedesclaux, Notary Public    [Rubric, Pedesclaux]  
  
  
[p. #6] [dig.8]  
  
  
Julia Fortier, *negra libre*, resident of this city, in the proceedings that I began against *Don* Joseph Piquery about achieving the freedom of the *negro* Medery, his slave, for the price of his fair valuation, before Your Lordship, has sent the aforementioned named appraiser on his behalf, and in consideration of coming from the countryside one league from this city on the other side of the [Mississippi] river, [I beg] Your Lordship order served freedom papers via subpoena, given charge to any able person, thusly. To Your Lordship, I beg you to provide and order as I request, with due justice, and by which I swear it, etc.  
  
For Julia Fortier   
[Signed:] Felipe Guinault  
  
  
As requested.  
[Rubric, Carondelet]    [Rubric, Vidal]  
  
Thus ordered: [By] the Lord Baron de Carondelet, Knight of the Religious [Order] of St. John, Colonel of the Royal Armies,  
  
  
[p. #6] [dig.9]  
  
  
Governor, Intendant-General, and Royal Vice-Patron of this Province of Louisiana with dictum of Lord Dr. *Don* Nicolas Maria Vidal, Lieutenant-Governor, CivilLegal Advisor, and Advisor General of the Government, which they sign in New Orleans on the 13th of March of seventeen-hundred and ninety-three.  
  
[Signed] Pedro Pedesclaux, Notary Public     [Rubric, Pedesclaux]  
  
  
Notarized: On the said day I made [the decree] known to Julia Fortier. I attest,  
  
[Signed:] Pedesclaux, Notary Public  
[Rubric, Pedesclaux]  
  
  
Note: It was on the same day that the papers were issued and sent, and I delivered them to the party. I attest,   

[Signed:] Pedesclaux, Notary  
[Rubric, Pedesclaux]  
  
  
[p. #7] [dig.10]  
  
  
[blank]