# Summary   
 In 1725, an unnamed enslaved woman (or girl)–noted only as a *pièce d'Inde*–was transported by *pirogue* from New Orleans by her new enslaver, Sieur de Chavannes, to his plantation near the *Petits Collas* village upriver from the German Coast. Along the way, the woman attempted to flee captivity, jumping into the water at the sight of another *pirogue*, which belonged to Indigenous passers-by whom she presumably knew, perhaps from a previous attempt at *marronage* about one year earlier. Although de Chavannes recaptured the woman, pulling her from the water and bringing her ashore, she successfully escaped into the woods never to be heard from again. As a result, de Chavannes petitioned the Superior Council to release him from his obligation to pay his debts for the sale of the woman and claimed she must have simply been insane to have wanted to escape. The racialized and gendered language used in this document is reminiscent of "drapetomania," a supposed mental illness created in the 19th-century by enslavers wishing to explain why enslaved people would try to seek their freedom.  
   
[Transcription](#transcription-(French,-diplomatic))  
[Translation](#translation-(English,-modern))  
[Notes](#notes)  
   
## Transcription (French, diplomatic)  
  
[feuille 1 recto] [digital 2]  
  
  
A Messieurs les Presidents  
Et. Conseillers du Conseil et Regis.  
  
De Chavannes secretaire dud.<sup></sup>[i]t</sup> Conseil a  
l’honneur de vous Representer qu’il auroit  
il y a prés de trois ans achepté du S.r De Gauvrit  
Cap.<sup>[itai]ne</sup> d'infanterie une *negresse* piece d'inde  
qu’il ne luy vendit que six cent Soixante  
livres, prix que la compagnie vendoit les___  
*negres* dans ce tem[p]s la, pour laquelle Somme  
il luy donna une Lettre de change de pareille   
valleur payable en france avec laquelle ledit  
S<sup>r</sup>. de Gauvrit achepta une vache et son Ecroit  
du S<sup>r</sup>. Berard pour lors chirurgien major  
a la nouvelle orleans, que partoit pour france  
delaquelle Lettre led.<sup>[i]t</sup> S<sup>r</sup>. Berard n’a point  
reccû le payement sans cependant quelle  
ait esté protostée, le supliant embarqua a  
l’instant lad.<sup>[i]te</sup> [page déchirée] Esclave dans une  
Pirogue d'Emprunt pour lamener sur son  
habitation des Petits Collas, il fut surpris  
  
  
[f. 2 verso] [dig.3]  
  
  
en arrivant au village des Collas de la voir  
frenetique, et sans continuel sa route l’auroit  
remené, et rendu au d.<sup>[i]t</sup> S<sup>r</sup>. de Gauvrit s’il eût  
eté le maitre de sa voiture; en arrivant a son  
habitation le lendemain matin les folies et  
frenesies de lad.<sup>[i]te</sup> *Negresse* redoublerent a  
l’aspect d’une pirogue menée par des *sauvages*   
dont elle s’effreia jusqu’au point de se  
jeter dans le fleuve et se vouloir noyer  
si on ne l’avoit secourüe, sans autre cause  
que son alienation d’Esprit, puis qu’il y avoit  
plus d’un an quelle voioit journellement des  
*Indiens*, et aprés que l’on l’eut tirée de l’eau  
et fait manger s’en alla au bout d’une heure  
dans les bois, sans que l’on en ait jamais  
eû aucune nouvelle depuis.  
  
  
Depuis lequel temps le supliant n’a  
entendu [parler] de rien, il a crû que la   
Lettre de change qu’il avoit tirée sur Paris  
  
  
[f. 2r] [dig.4]  
  
êtoit acquittée, cependant depuis deux jours  
le S<sup>r</sup>. De Gauvrit luy a dit que cette lettre  
n’avoit pas été payeé quoy quelle n’aye pas  
esté protestée, et demande que le supliant  
luy paye lad.<sup>[i]te</sup> somme de 660++. pour lad.[i]te  
negresse, mais comme il a apris que cette  
negresse venoit de la Comp.[agni]e Et que led.<sup>[i]t</sup> S.<sup>r</sup>  
de Gauvrit ne l’a pas payeé qu’il la vendu  
au supliant contre les deffences du con.<sup>el</sup>  
il craint que s’il venoit a la payer que vous  
ne la luy fassiés payer une seconde fois,  
ce qui l’oblige d’avoir recours a vous.  
Ce Consideré, Messieurs il vous plaise  
permettre au supliant d’assigner devant  
vous atel jour qu’il vous plaira led.<sup>[i]t</sup> S<sup>r</sup>.  
de Gauvrit pour voir dire qu’il raportera  
au supliant la permission qu’il a eû du  
con.<sup>el</sup> pour vêndre lad.<sup>[i]te</sup> *Negresse* ou  
la quittance du prix d’icelle pour faire  
voir qu’il la payeé, aux offres que fait  
  
  
[f. 2v] [dig.5]  
  
  
le supliant d’acquitter lad.<sup>[i]te</sup> lettre de  
change, et luy permettre d’arrete icelle  
entre les mains de ceux qui en sont  
porteurs <sup>++sauf</sup> a prendre d’au.<sup>**re**</sup> conclusions  
et vous fera**s** bien.  
  
a la N.<sup>[ouve]lle</sup> orleans ce 10 Avril 1725  
[Signé:] De Chavannes  
  
Permis d’assigner au premier  
jour ala N.<sup>[ouve]lle</sup> Orleans le 20.<sup>e</sup>  
avril 1725,   
  
  
[Signé:] fazende  
  
  
## Translation (English, modern)  
  
[page #1] [digital 2]  
  

To the Gentlemen Presidents And Councilors of the Council and King  
  
De Chavannes, Secretary of the said Council, has the honor of representing to you that he had, nearly three years ago [now], purchased from Sr. de Gauvrit, Infantry Captain, a *négresse*, *pièce d’Inde*, whom he [de Gauvrit] sold to him [de Chavannes] for only six-hundred and sixty *livres*, [the] price at which the company sold the *nègres* at that time,[^i] for which amount he gave him a Bill of Exchange of equal value [that is] payable in France, with which the aforementioned *Sr.* de Gauvrit purchased a cow and its calf from *Sr.* Berard, [who was] at the time the chief surgeon of New Orleans [and] who was leaving for France. Of which [amount of] the Bill [for the cows] the aforementioned *Sr.* Berard has not received payment yet [but], [even] without [the promissory note] having been vacated, the supplicant [de Chavannes] loaded at that moment the said [page torn] slave into a borrowed *pirogue* to bring her to his plantation at the *Petits Collas* [an Acolapissa village on the Mississippi River]. He was surprised,  
  
  
[p. #2] [dig.3]  
  
    
upon arriving at the village of the *Collas*,[^ii] to see her frantic, and without [having needed to] continue his journey he would have taken her back, and given her [back] to the said *Sr.* de Gauvrit, if [only] he had been the master of the vehicle [*pirogue*]. Upon his arrival at his plantation the following morning, the madness and frenzies of the said *négresse* redoubled at the sight of [another] pirogue manned by some *sauvages*, at which point she took fright, throwing herself into the river and wanting to drown herself–[which she would have done] if she had not been rescued–without any other reason than her losing her mind. [By] then, it had been over a year since she had seen the *Indiens* daily, and after she had been pulled out of the water and made to eat, within an hour she went away into the woods, without anyone having any news of her since.  
  
Since which time the supplicant has heard of nothing, [thus] he believed that the Bill of Exchange that he had sent to Paris  
  
  
[p. #3] [dig.4]  
  
  
had been forgiven. However, since two days [ago], Sr. de Gauvrit told him that this Bill had not been paid, [and] it had not been vacated, and [he] asks that the supplicant pay him the said sum of 660 *livres* for the said *négresse*. But as he [de Chavannes] learned this *négresse* came from the Company [of the Indies], and that the said *Sr.* de Gauvrit had not paid for her at the time that he had sold her to the supplicant, contrary to the prohibitions of Council. He [the supplicant] fears that if he pays you might make him pay a second time, which would force him to take recourse with you. With this being considered, *Messieurs*, if you would please permit the supplicant to summon before you, on whichever day should please you, the said *Sr.* de Gauvrit, so that he may report to the supplicant the permission that he had from the Council to sell the said négresse, or [provide] the receipt for the price of her to prove that he had paid it, [and] proffer to  
  
  
[p. #4] [dig.5]  
  
  
the supplicant to discharge the said Bill of Exchange, and permit him to stop [the transfer] [of funds] into hands of those who are [the Bill's] bearers, barring other conclusions [of which] you would be well to make.  
  
At New Orleans, [on] this [day], 10th April 1725  
  
[Signed:] [Jean Baptiste] de Chavannes  
  
  
Permission to summon [de Gauvrit] to appear on the first day [possible]. At New Orleans, the 20th April 1725.   
  
[Signed:] [Jacques] Fazende  
  
  
## Notes    
  
[^i]: Employing *pièce d’Inde* reduced Africans to a measurement of commercial exchange, in an attempt to erase their humanity. In September 1721, French officials established the exchange rate of *pièce d’Inde* in Louisiana at 660 *livres*, the price at which this unnamed woman was purchased in 1722 or 1723. B. F. French, *Historical Collections of Louisiana and Florida* (New York: J. Sabin & Sons, 1869), 3: 101-3. For more on *pièce d’Inde* and gender, see Jessica Marie Johnson, *Wicked Flesh: Black Women, Intimacy, and Freedom in the Atlantic World* (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2020), 77-120.    
     
[^ii]: The name of the community whom the French called the *Petits Collas*–a smaller band of the Acolapissa–signals that the French recognized this Native nation as a distinct polity, one of the *Petite Nations*. For more on the *Petite Nations* and the diversity of strategies they pursued in the Gulf South to shape French colonization, see Elizabeth N. Ellis, *The Great Power of Small Nations: Indigenous Diplomacy in the Gulf South* (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2022). For a reference to the home of this enslaved woman and de Chavannes in a colonial journal, see “Journal of Diron D’Artaguiette, Inspector General of Louisiana, 1722-1723,” in Newton D. Mereness, ed., *Travels in the American Colonies* (New York: Macmillan Company, 1916), 41-42, [https://www.loc.gov/item/16009410/](https://www.loc.gov/item/16009410/).