# Summary  
[In Africans in Colonial Louisiana, Dr. Gwendolyn Midlo Hall argues this document offers the first Gulf Coast reference to gumbo (“un Gombeau”) in the archive.ⁱ This is the testimony of Mama “Julie” Comba,ⁱⁱ a fifty year old négresse, an African woman of the Mandinga Nation who lived in the Hospital for the Poor (L'Hôpital des Pauvres) and was enslaved to the Capuchin priests. Mama Comba appears before the French Superior Council in this, her second interrogation, as a result of the arrest of two runaways, the nègre Cézar, and the nègre Louis, called Foy (dit Foÿ). The runaways were caught and accused of murder, but ultimately charged with public drunkenness, theft and firing weapons into the air (no one was killed), and with being fugitives. Mama Comba was interrogated because she hosted a feast that Cézar and Louis were guests at, bringing with them a pig that Louis allegedly stole and that the guests all took part in cooking and eating. The document below is drawn from part of Mama Comba's testimony.  
]
  
[Transcription](#transcription-(French,-diplomatic))  
[Translation](#translation-(English,-modern))  
[Notes](#notes)  
  
## Transcription (French, diplomatic)  
  
[feuille 1 recto] [digital 3]  
    
[Marginalia:] pre paye  
[Rubrica, Foucault]  
4 Septembre 1764  
Interrogatoire  
de la négresse   
Comba  
    
[Corps:]  
    
N.^o 1835 Du 4. 7.^bre 1764  
Interrogatoire fait par nous Conseiller Commissaire   
En Cette partie a La Requette du procureur General   
Du Roy et En Vertu de L'ordonnance de Monsieur  
Dabbadie, a La Negresse nommée Comba Contre  
Le Negre nommé Louis accusé et tenu a prison  
de Cette Ville ainsi qu'il ensuit   
      
A Eté Emmené de prison La Negresse nommée  
Comba demeurant a L'hopital des pauvres,   
Laquelle après serment par elle fait de Dire  
Verité fus laquelle seroit par nous interrogée   
L'a été ainsi qu'il ensuit  
    
Interrogée de Son nom age qualité et Demeure   
a Dit S'appeller Julie autrement Comba agée  
de Cinquante ans nation manenga  
demeurant a   
l'hopital Des pauvres  
      
Interrogée Si elle Connoit Le nommé Loüis ou foÿ  
a Dit qu'elle Le Connoit depuis qu'il a til dans du  
pais Cÿ et non pas auparavant   
      
      
Interrogée depuis quand elle n'avoit pas vü Le dit  
Loüis  
a Dit ne L'avoir pas Vü depuis deux mois qui etoit  
avant d'estre mise en prison  
      
Interrogée Commant est la quelle Connoissoit Louis  
a Dit qu'après que Loüis fus dessendü des illinois  
elle avoit Coutume D'aller Souvant Voir Louison  
Dans Le Jardin Cantrelle, qu'un jour elle ÿ füt  
Eele ÿ füt et ÿ trouva plusieurs Negres Bambaras  
qu'ils S'amuserent beaucoup.. qu'ensuite La  
Negresse Louison fut La chercher une autre fois  
      
      
[Signé:] Fazende     [Signé:] Garic, Greffier  
      
      
[f. 1 verso] [dig.4]  
      
qu'elle ÿ Retourna et qu'elle ÿ trouva encore Le negre  
Loüis qu'ils ÿ Souperent ensemble, que La négresse  
nommée fatema appartenant a M.^r de Lafrenière avoit  
preparé Le Soupér, qu'alors elle dit a Louis quetce qu’il  
fezoit  La qu'il etois marron, que Loüis Luy dit   
qu'il etois Dessendu avec Sa Maitress des illinois  
qu'il n'etois pas marron qu'elle Luÿ dit Commant   
Li gagner a vivre puis que iL ne travaillait point   
que Le dit Louis Luÿ dit que Sa maitress Le   
Laissoit Libre parce quil avoir mal a une Jambe  
et Jusqu'à ce qu'il fut Guerÿ que pour manger   
Il n'en manquait point qu'il en trouvoit par tout  
dans La Ville; adit Depuis que Ladite Louison  
avoir permission de Son maitre pour le Souper   
Oü ils ne mangerent que Du Cochon qui apartenoit   
aLa Nègresse Louison  
      
Interrogée S'ils etoient plusieurs   
A Dit quils etoient plusieurs mais qu'elle ne Les  
connnoit point  
      
Interrogée si elle na Jamais vü Le dit Louis a l'hopital  
des pauvres  
adit quelle L'y a vü plusiers fois.  
      
Interrogée Si Le negre Louis n'avoit pas Couchée avec   
elle Dans Sa Cabane   
A Dit qu'ouÿ qu'il ÿ avoit Couché qu'elle ne Scavoir Pas qu'il fut marron  
      
Interrogée Si elle ne Luy avoir pas donné un Gombeau   
avec Cezar et une autre negresse  
a Dit qu'on ÿ Cela etoit Vraÿ qu'ils etoient quatre   
~~Interrogée~~ que Cezar meme Donna a Louis Cinquante  
sols pour aller chercher Le filet qu'il ÿ fut et   
Burent tous ensemble  
      
[Signé:] Fazende     [Signé:] Garic, Greffier  
      
      
[f. 2r] [dig.5]  
      
Interrogée Si Louis ne Luÿ avoit pas donné une  
Carotte de tabac   
a Dit qu'ouÿ qu'il Luy en avoit Donné une mais  
qu'il La repris apres quil en avoit Volé Dix  
avec de La toile Dont il a fait des chemises et des Culottes  
qu'il ne Se Cachoit point quil Les Cousoit devant  
La porte de L'hopital qu'elle Luÿ avoir donné des   
Eguilles   
      
      
Interrogée Si Elle ne Scait pas Si Louis avoirVolé   
ailleurs   
A Dit qu'elle Scait que Louis avoit Vollé des hardes   
A LaNegresse au Sr. Baschemin, mais qu'il avoit Ensuite vendu Les hardes mais non pas L'argent  
qu'il avoit Volé aussi qu'il L'avoit employé en   
taffia.  
      
Interrogée Si elle na pas sçut que Louis avoir Volé un Cochon aux Jesuites  
a Dit que Cela etoit Vraÿ que Louis avoit tué un  
Cochon, mais Comme Ce Cochon etoit gros il ne   
Peut Le faire Sortir par dessus La palissade  
que Luÿ et Cesar Le partagerent, et chacun  
fu passer sa portion, par dessüs La palissade  
et que Louïs fut vendre La Sienne au bayou  
qu'au surplus Ce Louis Luy en Donna un  
morceau qu'ils mangerent ensemble tous Les   
Deux.   
      
Interrogée Si elle na pas Connoissance que Le negre Louis  
au volé ch'z La Dame Daneville   
a Dit qu'etant a Laver au fossé elle avoir vü  
beaucoup de Linge a secher dans Le Jardin au S.^r   
Cantrelle qu'elle avoit demandé a Louison  
Si elle avoit Lavé qu'elle Luÿ dit que non, que  
Cetait du Linge au Negre Louis, mais que Ce Linge  
      
      
[Signé:] Fazende     [Signé:] Garic, Notary  
      
      
[f. 2v] [dig.6]  
      
N'avoit Jamais eté porté chez elle.  
      
Interrogée Si elle n'a pas Connoissance que Le negre  
Louis Couchoit souvant chéz Louison dans La  
Cabanne ou jardin de Cantrelle  
a Dit que depuis que Louis etoit dessendu des illinois  
il Couchoit dans Lad.^e Cabanne ou ch'z elle  
quil ÿ avoit même Couché plusieurs fois  
qui est tout Ce qu'elle a Dit Scavoir.  
Lecture a elle faite du present interrogatoire   
aDit Le bien entendre Ses reponses Contenir Verité  
Et ÿ a persisté et Na Sçu Signer  
       
[Signé:] Fazende     [Signé:] Garic, Greffier  
      
## Translation (English, modern)  
    
[page # 1] [digital 3]  
    

[Marginal note:]  Pre-paid  
[Rubric, Foucault]  
September 4, 1764  
Interrogation  
of the *négresse*   
Comba  
    
[Body:]  
    
No. 1835 of September 4, 1764  
Interrogation made for the Advisor Commissioner in the petition of request by the Advisor General of the King and in virtue of the order of Mr. D'Abbadie, of the *négresse* named Comba against the *nègre* named Louis, detained in prisonin this city as follows:  
  
Taken from the prison, the *négresse*, named Comba, stays at *l'Hôpital des Pauvres* [Charity Hospital]. After taking her oath, she says she will speak truth when questioned by us, as follows:  
  
Questioned of her name, age, and her residence, she said she is called Julie, otherwise Comba, aged fifty years, of the Mandinga Nation, living in Charity Hospital.  
  
Questioned if she knows the named Louis, or Foÿ, she said that she has known him since he has been in this country here, and not before.  
  
Questioned since when she had not seen the said Louis, she said not to have seen him for two months, because she has been placed in prison.  
  
Questioned how she knows Louis, she said after Louis left Illinois, she was accustomed to go to see Louison at Cantrelle's garden. One day, she was visiting and found there to be many Bambara *nègres* [there]. That they had a very good time, then the *négresse*, Louison, went to look for her another time.  
              
[Signed:] Fazende     [Signed:] Garic, Notary  
   
   
[p. # 2] [dig.4]  
   

That she returned there, and that she found the *nègre*, Louis, that they suppered there together with the *négresse* named Fatima, belonging to Mr. de Lafreniere, who had prepared the supper. She then told Louis what was he doing there, that he was a maroon, that Louis told her that he had come with his mistress from Illinois, that he is not a maroon. That she asked how he earned a living since he does not work, that the said Louis, he said his mistress let him live free because he has a leg injury, and until he was cured, only to eat what there was no shortage of, that he found around the city. He said that the said Louison had permission from her master for the supper, where they only ate pork which belonged to the *négresse*, Louison.  
  
Asked if they were several, she said they were several but she does not know how many.  
  
Asked if she ever saw the said Louis at the Hospital for the Poor, she said he had been there many times.  
  
Asked if the *nègre*, Louis, had not slept with her in her cabin, she said that yes, that he had slept there, that she did not know that he was a maroon.  
  
Asked if she had given him some gumbo with Cézar and another *négresse*, she said it is true, they were four, that Cézar gave Louis fifty *sols* [money] to go find the *filet* [of alcohol] that he went [to get it], and they all drank together.  
         
[Signed:] Fazende     [Signed:] Garic, Notary  
  
  
[p. #3] [dig.5]  
  
  
Asked if Louis had not given her a *carotte* [small amount] of tobacco, she said that yes he gave her some but that he took it back, having stolen ten along with some cotton linen, from which he made shirts and pants. This he did not hide. He sewed in front of the door of Charity Hospital, that she had given him the sewing needles.  
  
When asked if she knew if Louis had stolen from anywhere else, she said she knew that Louis had stolen clothes from the *négresse* of *Sieur* Baschemin, but that he had then sold the clothes, but not the money that he had also stolen, that he had used to get *tafia* [Creole rum].  
  
Questioned if she knew if Louis had stolen a pig from the Jesuits, she said it was true Louis had killed the pig, but that this pig was so big he could not get it over the palisade.That he and Cézar shared it, and each passed their portion over the palisade. And Louis went to sell his share at the bayou. Of what was left, Louis gave him a piece that they ate together, the both of them.  
  
Questioned if she did not know that the *nègre*, Louis, had stolen from the home of the Lady D'Anville, she said that she saw the washing in the ditch, and a lot of clothes drying in the garden of *Sieur* Cantrelle. She asked Louison if she had done the washing, the she had said no, that it was the clothing of the *nègre*, Louis, but that the clothes   
[Signed:] Fazende      [Signed:] Garic, Notary  
  
  
[p. #4] [dig.6]  
  

were never to be brought to her home.  
   
Questioned if she knew that the *nègre*, Louis, was often sleeping at the  home or garden of Cantrelle, she said since Louis came from Illinois, he sleeps in the said cabin or at her place. That he had slept there many times, that is everything to her knowledge, she said. The present interrogatory was read back to her she said she understood it, her answers contained the truth, persisted in this, and did not know how to sign.  
   
   
[Signed:] Fazende     [Signed:] Garic, Notary  
