# Summary  
A woman named Angelica, *negra* enslaved by Antonio Ramis, goes before the *cabildo* at New Orleans to initiate *coartación* proceedings for the valuation of her granddaughter, a four-year old named Maria Antonia, in order to purchase her freedom. The two men appointed by the court to appraise the child, Antonio "Villefranche" Boudousquié and Santiago "Jacques" Tarascon, find her to be worth 175 pesos and 200 pesos, respectively.  
  
[Transcription](#transcription-spanish-diplomatic)  
[Translation](#translation-english-modern)  
[Notes](#notes)  
  
## Transcription (Spanish, diplomatic)     
    
[folio 2 recto] [digital 2]    
    

+    
<u>Año de 1793</u>    
    
Dilig.<sup>s  principiada por Angelica   
negra sbre pretender la livertad de  
Maria Antonia Su Nieta esclava  
De Santiago Porta___  
  
N.<sup>o 26___  
#559 [moderno, en lápiz azul]  
D N___ ~~16~~  
~~              <u>14</u>~~  
~~<u>SN<sup>0</sup> 18</u>~~  
  
  
[f. 2 verso] [dig.3]  
  
[en blanco]  
  
  
[f. 3r] [dig.4]  
  
3  
Angelica negra quartada p.<sup>r</sup> Anto  
nio Ramis en las dirigencias que  
he promovido sobre darle la libertad  
a mi nieta nombrada Maria Anto  
nia Esclava de D.<sup>n</sup> Santiago Porta  
y lo demas digo que se sirvio ũnd  
demanda que dentro de tercero dia  
el ante dhō nombrase un tercero  
por Su parte y Como Consta dela   
diliga del presente Es.<sup>no</sup> el Suso   
dhō tiene su morada en su habita.<sup>on</sup>  
en atencion de que Se ha de servir   
ũnd mandar librar boleta de com  
parendo, al Suso dhō con insercion  
de la dhā providen.<sup>a</sup> cometeda Su   
estim<sup>on</sup> a qualquier pers.<sup>a</sup> habil  
~  
  
  
[f. 3v] [dig.5]  
  
portante  
Amd Suplico Se Sirva proveer y  
mandar como devo pedido por  
ser deJusticia y en lo nesesa  
rio &<sup>a</sup>.  
  
Como lo pido___  
[Firmado:] Piernas  
  
Proveido el señor <sup>Do</sup> Pedro Piernas the  
mente coron.<sup>l</sup> en el Batallon fixo de esta  
Plaza y Alcalde ordinario De primer   
soto De esta ciudad que lo firmó a trein   
ta de Julio D emil set.<sup>S</sup> setenta y nueve.  
  
  
[Firmado:] Andrés Almonester de Roxas  
[Rubrica, Almonester]  
  
En Lo ora lo hice saver á Angelica  
negra Doy fee___  
  
[Firmado:] Andrés Almonester de Roxas  
[Rubrica, Almonester]  
  
  
[f. 4r] [dig.6]  
  
Librosela voleta que empreza \}  
yentregue ala parte Doy fee  \}  
  
[Rubrica, Almonester]  
  
  
[f. 4v] [dig.7]  
  
[en blanco]  
  
  
[f. 5r] [dig.8]  
  
5  
Por decretto proveiydo en este dia   
por D<sup>n</sup> Pedro piernas then.<sup>~</sup> del ba  
tallon fixo de esta plasa esta man  
dado lo siguiente____  
  
Auto   hace por nombrado el tercero que  
esta parte oferece acepte y Jure en la   
forma de estilo y haga Sele Saver  
a D.n Santiago porte nombre otra   
dentro de tres dias por la Suya a con  
aprecerim<sup>to</sup> de procederse con el  
nombrado = Piernas_____  
Cuya providencia esta mandado se  
le notifique a D.<sup>n</sup> Santiago porte  
por qualquier persona habil nueba  
orleans y Julio treinta de mil   
sett<sup>s</sup> setenta y nuebe años___  
  
[Firmado:] Almonester  
[Rubrica, Almonester]  
  
  
[f. 5v] [dig.9]  
  
Estando en la habitacion de D<sup>n</sup>  
Santiago porte distante de esta Ciud.<sup>d</sup>  
de una legua y de el otro lado del   
rio le notifique el cotenido en la boleta  
antecidente y para que Conesta lo   
pongo p.<sup>r</sup> dilig<sup>a</sup> Con advertencia q  
gastado quatro r.<sup>S</sup> par dos traveisas   
de ir y bober N<sup>va</sup> orleans y   
agusto dos de mil sẽtt. Setenta y   
nuebe años___  
  
  
[Firmado:] Pedro Bertoniere  
  
N.<sup>n</sup>  En la ciudad De La Nueva orleans á  
cinco de Agosto de mil Sett.<sup>s</sup> Setenta y   
nueve años Yo el eššno hice saver el Dec.<sup>to</sup>  
anteced.<sup>te</sup> ad.<sup>n</sup> Santiago Borta en su  
pers.<sup>a</sup> quien Dijo que nom__  
brada por tercero por Su parte   
a d.<sup>n</sup> Antonio Boudurquie para<sup>~</sup>   
~  
  
  
[f. 6r] [dig.10]  
  
  
6  
el aprecio de la mulatica que se expresa  
esto dio por su repuesta y lo firmo de   
que doy fee___   
  
[Firmado:] Jacques Porte  
[Firmado:] Almonester [Rubrica, Almonester]  
  
  
[Marginalia:]   
  
N.<sup>n</sup> acep.<sup>n</sup>    
Y juranto     \}  
  
  
[Cuerpo:]  
  
En la Ciudad de la Nueva Orleans dho  
dia mes y año Yo el essno<sup>~</sup> hice saver el nombram.<sup>to</sup> anteced.<sup>to</sup> a D.<sup>n</sup> Ant.<sup>o</sup> Boudurquier   
q.<sup>n</sup> Dijo que lo aceptava y acepto y Juro   
por Dios ntro Señor y una Señal De  
cruz De proceder bien y fielmente  
y lo firmo de que Doy fee__  
  
  
[Firmado:] Boudousquié  
[Firmado:] Almonester  [Rubrica, Almonester]  
  
  
[f. 6v] [dig.11]  
  
  
En la Ciudad De la Nueva Orleans,  
dho dia mes y año Santiago Tararca  
tercero nombrado por la negra Ange  
lica y D.<sup>n</sup> Antonio Boudusquier  
en la misma Calidad para la esti-  
macion y áprecio De una mulati  
ca nombrada Maria Antonia De  
edad De quatro años haviendola   
visto en presencia De mi el es<sup>~sno</sup>, y  
enferenciado largo rato Sobre Su   
valor Dijeron el dho Tasarcon que la   
estimava en ciento Settenta y cinco   
p.<sup>S</sup> y el referido Boudusquie en   
Doscientos p.<sup>S</sup> cuia estima.~ Dijo haver  
hecho bien y fielm.<sup>te</sup> seg.<sup>n</sup> si inte lig.<sup>a</sup> y lo  
firmaron De qué Doy fee___  
  
[Firmado:] Tarascon     
[Firmado:] Boudousquié   
  
  
Antemi   
[Firmado:] Andres Almonester De Roxas   
s.<sup>no</sup> p.<sup>co</sup>   
[Rubrica, Almonester]  
  
  
[f. 7r] [dig.12]  
  
  
[en blanco]  
  
  
[f. 7v] [dig.13]  
  

[en blanco]  
  
  
## Translation (English, modern)  
  
[page #1] [digital 2]  
  
+  
<u>Year 1793</u>  
  
Proceedings initiated by Angelica, *negra*, about claiming the freedom of Maria Antonia, her granddaughter, *esclava* of Santiago Porta.  
  
Number 26  
#559 [modern, in blue pencil]  
D N___ [number crossed out]  
[number notation crossed out]  
[number notation crossed out]  
  
  
[p. #2] [dig.3]  
  
  
[blank]  
  
  
[p. #3] [dig.4]  
  
  
3  
Angelica *negra coartada*[^i] [belonging to] Antonio Ramis in the proceedings that have begun regarding granting freedom to my granddaughter, named Maria Antonia, *esclava* of *Don* Santiago Porta,and I also say that he was served and ordered that within three days the aforesaid shall appoint a third party on his behalf, and as stated in the proceedings by the present notary, the aforesaid has his domicile on his plantation, [and] in consideration of which is servedand ordered by subpoena issued to the aforesaid with the inclusion of the judicial resolution committing as his estimator any capable person.  
~  
  
  
[p. #4] [dig.5]  
  
  
Thusly, before Your Lordship, I beg you provide and order with God as I have requested for what is just and in which way is necessary, etc.  
  
As I demand,  
  
   
[Signed:] Piernas  
  
Thus ordered: [By] Lord Don Pedro Piernas, Lieutenant Colonel of the Fixed Regiment[^ii] of this post, and *alcalde ordinario*, the first mayor of this city, which he signs on the thirtieth of July of one-thousand seven-hundred and seventy-nine.  
  

[Signed:] Andrés Almonester de Roxas  
[Rubric, Almonester]  
  
On the same day, I made this known to Angelica, *negra*. I certify,  
  
[Signed:] Andrés Almonester de Roxas  
[Rubric, Almonester]  
  
  
[p. #5] [dig.6]  
  
  
The Deed of Freedom is thus issued and delivered to the party. I certify,  
  
[Rubric, Almonester]  
  
  
[p. #6] [dig.7]  
  
  
[blank]  
  
  
[p. #7] [dig.8]  
  
  
5
By the decree provided on this day by *Don* Pedro Piernas, Lieutenant [Colonel] of theFixed Regiment of this post, the following is ordered.   
   
Judgment: Having been named third [party] that for his part offers, accepts, and swears [an oath] in the [ordinary] form [and] style, and let it be known  to *Don* Santiago Porta to name another within three days for his own [party] with  eagerness to proceed with the  named [representative to give oath]. Piernas, [on] whose providence [it] is ordered to notify *Don* Santiago Porta, [and to do so] by any person able. [At] New Orleans [on] July 30 of one-thousand seven-hundred and seventy-nine.  
  
[Signed:] Almonester  
[Rubric, Almonester]  
  
  
[p. #8] [dig.9]  
  
   
Being at the plantation of *Don* Santiago Porta, [which is] far from this city by a league, and on the other side of the [Mississippi] river, I notified him of the contents on the ruling, aforementioned, and because of this I issue an Action of Warning; they are wasting four *reales* on two traversing women [who will] go and return to New Orleans [on] August second of one-thousand seven hundred seventy-nine.  
  
   
[Signed:] Pedro Bertonnière  
  
Notarized: In the City of New Orleans on the fifth of August of one-thousand seven-hundred and seventy-nine I, the notary, have made known the decree preceding, to *Don* Santiago Porta in person, who said he was appointed by a third party on his behalf, *Don* Antonio Boudousquié, for    
  
  
[p. #9] [dig.10]  
  
  
6  
the appraisal of the *mulatica*,[^iii] [and] as expressed he gave his answer, and he signs that which I certify.  
  
[Signed:] Jacques Porta  
[Signed:] Almonester [Rubric, Almonester]  
  
   
[Marginal note:]   
  
Notarized, accepted, and  decreed               \}  
   
  
[Body:]  
  
In the City of New Orleans on the aforementioned day, month, and year, I, the notary, made the previous appointment known to *Don* Antonio Boudousquié, who said that he accepted it, and having accepted and sworn [his oath] before our Lord God and [with] a sign of the Cross, shall proceed well and faithfully, and he signs that which I certify,  
  
[Signed:] Boudousquié  
[Signed:] Almonester  [Rubric,  Almonester]  
  
  
[p. #10] [dig.11]  
  
  
In the City of New Orleans, on the aforementioned day, month, and year, Santiago Tarascon, third party named by the *negra*, Angelica, and *Don* Antonio Boudousquié, in the same *calidad*, for the estimation and appreciation of one *mulatica* named Maria Antonia, four years old, having seen her in my, the notary's, presence and [having] talked for a long time about this with the said Tarascon, who said that he estimated her worth to be of 175 *pesos*, and the referenced Boudousquié [estimated her worth] as 200 *pesos*. They said to have done their duty with fidelity and to the best of their knowledge and  sign that which I certify,  
  
[Signed:] Tarascon   
[Signed:] Boudousquié  
  
  
Before me   
[Signed:] Andrés Almonester de Roxas,  
Notary Public  
[Rubric, Almonester]  
  
  
[p. #11] [dig.12]  
  
  
[blank]  
   
  
[p. #12] [dig.13]  
  
[blank]  
  
  
## Notes  
  
[^i]: In Spanish Louisiana, the practice of *coartación*–or manumission by self-purchase–proceeded after an enslaved person was evaluated by court appointed experts, a price was set, and a purchase agreement was made. This contractual agreement rendered the enslaved person *coartado/a* until the purchase price was reached and the final payment made. A *negra coartada* like Angelica was not yet free and could still be sold, transferred, or mortgaged, but only on conditional terms. See Alejandro de la Fuente and Ariela J. Gross, *Becoming Free, Becoming Black: Race, Freedom, and Law in Cuba, Virginia, and Louisiana* (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2020) and Kimberly S. Hanger, *Bounded Lives, Bounded Places: Free Black Society in Colonial New Orleans, 1769-1803* (Durham: Duke University Press, 1997).  
  
[^ii]: The Batallon de Infanteria Fixo de la Luisiana was formed by Governor Alejandro O'Reilly in 1769 in the wake of the Creole Revolt to suppress uprisings and enforce Spanish dominion in the territory. This militia was initially composed primarily of soldiers from Havana and included local residents of Louisiana by voluntary enlistment, conscription, and criminal sentence. See Gilbert C. Din, "'For Defense of Country and the Glory of Arms': Army Officers in Spanish Louisiana, 1766-1803," *Louisiana History* 43:1 (Winter 2002): 5-40.  
  
[^iii]: “*Mulatica*” in the Spanish colonial system is the diminutive of “*mulata*” and was used to refer to girls or young women. The term was most commonly used in Cuba and the Spanish Caribbean, and less so throughout the Spanish mainland. It did not necessarily denote legal status.