# Summary  
In 1726, a Bambara man named Biron arrived in Louisiana from Senegambia on the slave ship Aurora. For the next two years, he frequently resisted his enslavement. When he ran away in 1728, he was pursued by his enslaver, Jean Sougaine, who almost killed him while trying to recapture him.  
  
[Transcription](#transcription-(French,-diplomatic))  
[Translation](#translation-(English,-modern))  
[Notes](#notes)  
  
## Transcription (French, diplomatic)

[feuille 1 recto] [digital 2]


[Marginalia:] 

8 Juillet 1728
Declaration
et Plainte par
Le S.<sup>r</sup> Soubaigne
Contre Biron negre


[Corps:]

N.0 327
Est Comparu au greffe du Conseil Superieur
de la province de la Louisianne S.r Jean Soubaigne
hab.<sup>[itan]t</sup> dem.<sup>[euran]t</sup> a Chantilly lequel nous a dis et declaré 
qu’il a un negre nommé Biron provenant de la
cargraison du V.<sup>[aisse]au</sup> L’aurore,[^i] lequel a fait plusieurs 
fais le maron et entre autre hyer a midy Il___
Sabsenta, et le declarant ayant eté avertis par___
Ses autres negres decet abSence, Il courut apres
et la’yant ríncontré presque a moitié chemin de
cette rille assis dans les Cannes, et l’ayant apercus 
jl Sen fuit dans la profondeur dubois, et layant 
appellé plusieurs fois n’ayant pas Voulu renir
aluy il luy tira a coupper dû un coupde fussil 
pour létonner Seulement et lo’bliger a S<sup>e</sup> rendr<sup>e</sup> 
ce quil ne Voulu faire, au contraire jl courut___
encore plus fort, le declarant ayant fait un___ 
circuit dans le bois le trouva par terre et lorsqu’il 
lapercut jl Sesauva encore et encourant jl___ 
trouva une Canne qui le fis tomber par terre,
le declarant pour le’mpescher de Serelever
le Coucha enjoüe et luy dis ques’jl remuoit 
qu’il estoit mort cela obligea le<sup>d[it]</sup> Negre
de Se Rendre avec luy a la maison, et y’etant
le declarant appella un Negre pour metre
lemaron aux fers jl Sauta sur son fuss’il___
Du que Il Se Rendit le maitre, le declarant
~


[f. 1 verso] [dig.3]


tenant Saisir Son fusjl et le negre, en attendant 
le Secour de Ses autres negres jl luy osta de
crainte qu’il ne tira Sur luy dont et de quoy
Il fait la presente declaration fait a 
La N<sup>[ouve]lle</sup> orleans le huitieme Juillet mil 
Sept Cent Vingt huit, et a Signé

[Signé:] Soubaigne 


## Translation (English, modern)  
    
  
[page #1] [digital 2]  
  
  
[Marginal note:]   
  
July 8, 1728  
Declaration  
and Complaint by  
The *Sieur* Soubaigne  
Against Biron, *nègre*  
  
[Body:]  
    
No. 327  
Having appeared before the notary of the Superior Council of the Province of Louisiana, *Sieur* Jean Soubaigne, habitant living at Gentilly,[^ii] said and declared to us that he has a *nègre* named Biron, obtained from  the cargo of the ship, the Aurora, who has often gone maroon, among them yesterday at midday. He [Biron] was absent, and the declarant, being warned by his other *nègres* of this absence, he ran after [him], and having met him almost halfway to this city sitting in the canefield, and after seeing him, he [Biron] fled deep into the woods, and after calling him several times, [and him] not wanting to come [return] to him, he [Soubaigne] fired a shot at him [Biron], just to shock him and force him to surrender, which he did not want to do. On the contrary, he [Biron] ran again even faster. The declarant, after having made a lap around the woods, found him on the ground, and when he [Biron] saw him, he ran away again, and while running he found a reed [with his foot] that made him fall to the ground [again].    
The declarant, to prevent him from getting up, took aim at him and told him that if he moved again he was dead. That obliged the said nègre to return with him to the house, and while there the declarant called a[nother] nègre to put the maroon in irons. He [Biron] moved quickly at his [Soubaigne’s] gun [grabbing it] at which [time] he [Biron] made himself [his] master. The declarant,  
~  
  
  
[p. #2] [dig.3]  
  
  
holding his gun at the *nègre*, while waiting for help from his other nègres, left from him lest he shoot him [Biron], of whom and of what he [Soubaigne] makes the present declaration. [It was] done at New Orleans [on] July 8th, one-thousand seven-hundred twenty-eight, and signed,  
  
[Signed:] [Jean] Soubaigne  
  
  
## Notes  
  
[^i]: According to historian Gwendolyn Midlo Hall, two slave ships called *l’Aurore* arrived in French-controlled Louisiana prior to 1728. The first acquired captives at Ouidah, in the Bight of Benin, during the fall of 1718. When that ship reached Louisiana in June of 1719, it became the first transatlantic slave voyage to arrive in the colony. The second l’Aurore voyage reached Louisiana in March of 1726, with captives from the Senegambia region of West Africa. Both ships stopped in Grenada to restock supplies en route to Louisiana. In the documents, Biron was identified as Bambara and unable to speak any French. These details make it likely that Biron arrived on the second l’Aurore voyage in 1726, two years prior to the creation of these records. Gwendolyn Midlo Hall, *Africans in Colonial Louisiana: The Development of Afro-Creole Culture in the Eighteenth Century* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1992), 381-397.
  
[^ii]: Chantilly is the present-day neighborhood of Gentilly nearest to Bayou St. John (St. Jean). Before European intrusion, Bayou St. John was called Bayou Choupik, the Choctaw word for catfish. In modern Louisiana Creole and in Cajun French, the word is retained as *choupique*, meaning mudfish. 
