# Summary   
Petition for redhibitory action filed by Juan Baptista Richard against Joseph Rou, or Roth, for the sale of Maria and her daughter, also named Maria. Richard claims redhibitory action (i.e. "useless" or "defective good") due to deception in the sale by both Rou and Widow Pery. The suit states that Maria (*hija*) is "*baldada*," or "crippled," and that the mother shares in the same unnamed disability. At the time of the purchase, Maria (*madre*) had been in jail for helping "*negros cimarrones*," and that within a month and a few days of the sale, the mother ended up in back jail for going maroon.  
  
[Transcription](#transcription-spanish-diplomatic)  
[Translation](#translation-english-modern)  
  
## Transcription (Spanish, diplomatic)  
  
[folio 3 recto] [digital 6]  
  
  
[Marginalia:]   
  
Señor D.<sup>n</sup> Luis de Unzaga   
y Amezaga, Brigadier De[rasgado]  
R.<sup>s</sup> Ex.<sup>s</sup> Du S.M. Gov.[rasgado]   
y Capitan General de La   
Provincia de La Luisiana   
&<sup>a</sup>__  
  
  
[Cuerpo:]  
  
Señor   
Juan Buap.<sup>ta</sup> Richard: puesto ã los piés de V.[rasgado]  
Con el Devido Respecto, expone muy humildem[rasgado]  
que havra un mes y medio que Compró De M.<sup>r</sup> Ro[rasgado]  
una Negra Con una Negritta su hija y Baldada; h[rasgado]  
dose el Supp.<sup>te</sup> en aquel entonces en Su habitacion   
La Costa De los Acadiens; el Dhõ M.<sup>r</sup> Rou se la ven[rasgado]  
p.<sup>r</sup> el precio de 350 p.<sup>s</sup> y en la Venta que hizo ala  
Supp.<sup>te</sup> se la Dió; por no tenér La Dhã esclava nin[rasgado]  
nas males Costumbres ny Defectos Diciendo que tenia  
orden De venderla por pertenecer ãla Viuda Pery  
que se hallava necessitada De Dineros para pagar  
Deudas; Ei Supp.<sup>te</sup> supo Luego el Contrario, porque el  
S.<sup>or</sup> Rou Compró La Dha Esclava de M.<sup>a</sup> Pery halla   
dose en la Carcel De esta Villa por haver Dado a[rasgado]   
ãlos Negros Cimarrones y ella tambien ã tenido el mis[rasgado]   
Defecto, el Dhõ S.<sup>or</sup> Rou La Compró por el precio De   
250 p.<sup>~</sup> Deviendo valer mas si fuera un buen Suj[rasgado]   
Pero La Dha Viuda Pery La Dio ã este precio para  
  
  
[f. 3 verso] [dig.7]  
  
Deshacer De ella.   
El pobre Supp.<sup>te</sup> que es un pobre habitante y y[rasgado]   
De Edad necessitando De una esclava para su ayuda y  
que hazeres, Se fió ãl Dhõ S.<sup>r</sup>  Rou diciendole y Dandole   
de palabras y por escritto que solo por la necessidad De Dhā   
Viuda Se vendia La esclava que un buen Sujetto buena   
tanto p.<sup>a</sup> La Casa Como p.<sup>a</sup> el Campo falsedad porque   
ãdemas de ser Suya y ya no De la Dha Viuda, Gano   
en venta cien pesos y enganó al pobre Supp.<sup>te</sup> porque   
al Cavo de mes y Dias se fue Cimarrona y esta hoy   
en Dia en la Carcel de esta Ciudad.  
A este fin el Supp.<sup>te</sup> Supplica my Rendidamente   
ã VS.<sup>a</sup> Se digne attendér ã Lo arriba espressado; porque,  
el Supp.<sup>te</sup> presenta estos Renglones ã VS.<sup>a</sup> Solamente, para   
que De V.S.<sup>a</sup> Reciba La Justicia q.<sup>e</sup> fuere Recta   
no Cessara De Rogar ã Dios que la Vidadé VSM.<sup>a</sup>   
Dilatados anõs. Nueba Orleans y 7 Henero <u>>de 1774</u>  
Por presntado el documento Frula-   
do. ___________  
  
[Firmado:] Unzaga  [Rubrica, Unzaga]  
  
  
Proveio ha S.<sup>r</sup> D. Luis de Unzaga  
y Amezaga a Brig.<sup>r</sup> de los rr.<sup>~</sup> ex.<sup>~</sup> y Gov.<sup>or</sup>  
  
~  
  
  
[f .4r] [dig.8]  
  
  
3  
Grãl de esta Prov.<sup>a</sup> por S.M. q lo Firmo   
en catorze de Henero demil Sett.<sup>e</sup> seten[rasgado]  
y quatro____________  
  
[Firmado:] Andres Almonester  
  
  
y Roxas s.<sup>no</sup> pu.<sup>co</sup>  
[Rubrica, Almonester]  
  
N.<sup>n~</sup>   Enel mizmo dia hise saver eldecreto q  
antecede a Juan Bãpta Richard doyfee___  
  
[moderno, círculo, a lápiz] 3  
  
[Firmado:] Almonester  
  
  
s.<sup>no</sup>   
  
[Rubrica, Almonester]  
  
  
[f. 4v] [dig.9]  
  
  
[en blanco]  
  
  
[f. 5r] [dig.10]  
                                               
  
[Marginalia:]   
  
Lopres.<sup>to</sup>  
la parte  
exprerando  
no saver  
Firmar,   
15 de Hen<sup>o</sup>  
de1774_  
Doy fee__  
  
[Firmado:] Almonester   
  
  
s.<sup>no</sup>  
[Rubrica, Almonester]   
  
[Cuerpo:]  
  
4-  
Juan Bãpta Richard enlosautos q. sigl[rasgado]  
contra Jph Roth sobre él engaño conq hapro-  
cedido en la Venta de una negra nom.<sup>da</sup> maria  
con una neg.<sup>ta</sup> su hija delmizmo nře, y lodemas  
oy digo q.<sup>e</sup> deimdemanda se ledio travado, y sin  
embargo q.<sup>e </sup>ei vo P. de esta fue.<sup>a</sup> y q. tiene aqui  
su familia hapando al Puesto de Manchac  
dena hab.<sup>n</sup> mia p.<sup>a</sup> estar en ella álg<sup>n</sup> tpo.<sup>~</sup> y p.<sup>r</sup>  
el perhucio q.<sup>e</sup> le me sigue entre demore se  
ha aservir los. mandar libran boleta de  
comparendo connetiva del Com.<sup>te</sup> de dho Puesto  
p.<sup>a</sup> q.<sup>e</sup> hagacomparecer ádho Roth en este  
tribunal porsi o su poder instruid yex-  
pentado p.<sup>a</sup> elreg.<sup>to</sup> de esta Causa por tanto___  
AVs. sup.<sup>co</sup> sevirba proveher como pido con he[rasgado]  
conas y Juro lones.<sup>o</sup>. &.<sup>a</sup>__________  
Como lo píde con termino de quin-  
ce dias cometida su Yntimascion   
qualq.<sup>a</sup> Persona habil.___  
  
[Rubrica, Unzaga]     [Rubrica, Odoardo de Sayas]  
  
Proveio lo el S. d. Luis de[rasgado]  
  
  
[f. 5v] [dig.11]  
                        
  
Unzaga y Amezaga Brig.<sup>a</sup> de los rr<sup>~</sup>  
ex.<sup>~</sup> y Gov.<sup>or</sup> Grãl de esta Prov.<sup>a</sup> por S  
M. q lo rubrico conn Asesor Grãl  
en quunze de Henero demil sett<sup>~</sup>  
settenta y quatro______  
  
[Firmado:] Andres Almonestér  
  
  
y Roxas s.<sup>no</sup> pu.<sup>co</sup>  
  
[Rubrica, Almonester]  
  
N<sup>n</sup>   Enelmizmo dia hizesavor el   
decreto q. antecede a Juan  
B<sup>ta</sup> Richard doyfee_______  
  
[Firmado:] Almonestér  
  
  
s.<sup>no</sup>  
  
[Rubrica, Almonester]  
  
Librece la Boleta q Demande  
y la entregué alap.<sup>te</sup> doy fee___  
[Rubrica, Almonester]  
  
En la ciudad Dela nueva orleans en nueve  
de febrero demil sietecientos setentay  
quattro Haller.<sup>no</sup> hizesaver del aras laso dado  
a Jph [rasgado] enpersoner doy fee_____  
  
[Firmado:] Almonestér  
  
  
[Rubrica, Almonester]  
  
  
## Translation (English, modern)    

[page # 1] [digital 6]


[Marginal note:]

Lord *Don *Luis de Unzagay Amezaga, Brigadier [General] of the Royal Armies of His Majesty, Governor, and Captain General of the Province of Louisiana, etc.

[Body:]


Sir, 
Juan Baptista Richard comes before Your [Lordship] with all due respect, [and] humbly lays forth that there has been a month and a half since he purchased from Mr. Rou, a *negra* with a *negrita*, her child, [who is] disabled, [and that] the supplicant then at that time was at his plantation on the Acadian Coast [when] the said Mr. Rou sold them to him [Richard] for the price of 350 *pesos.* In the sale that was conducted, the supplicant gave it [the price asked], [yet] for not having the said slave [before him], [and] was [promised that the slave]   had no bad habits or defects [of body or quality], [Rou] claiming [also] that he had orders to sell her because she belonged to the Widow Pery who had needed the money to pay her debts. The supplicant [Richard] found out later that, to the contrary, *Señor* Rou bought the said slave from Ms. Pery, [which she] found in the jail of this village for having given assistance to the *negros cimarrones*, and she [the slave] also had the same defect [as her child]. The said *Señor* Rou bought her for [only] the price of  250 *pesos*, being that she would be worth more if she were a good subject. But the said Widow Pery gave her at this price to


[p. #2] [dig.7]


get rid of her. The poor petitioner, who is a poor resident and of an [older] age, is in need of a slave to aid and help him with his chores. She [the Widow Pery] had confided in the said Mr. Rou, telling him and giving him her word and in writing that only for the necessity of the said widow, the slave was sold as a good subject, good for the house as well as for the field, [which is a] falsehood. 
Besides, being his [Richard’s] and no longer that of the said widow, he [Rou] earned in the sale 100 *pesos* and deceived the poor petitioner, because within a month and a few days she went *cimarrona* [again] and is now today in the jail of this city. To this end, the supplicant begs humbly [in submission] to Your Lordship, to give consideration to the above expressed, because the supplicant presents this written testimony to Your Lordship only so that, from Your Lordship, [he may] receive the justice that is righteous,[and he] will not stop praying to God that the life of Your Excellency is expanded by [many] years. [At] New Orleans, [on the] 7th [of] January, 1774.
To be filed: The document has been translated. 

[Signed:] Unzaga  [Rubric, Unzaga]


Thus ordered: [By] Lord *Don* Luis de Unzaga y Amezaga, Brigadier [General] of the Royal Armies, and Governor


[p. #3] [dig.8]


3
General of this Province by His Majesty, which he signs on [the] 14th of January of seventeen-and four.

[Signed:] Andres Almonester
y Roxas, Notary Public

[Rubric, Almonester]


On the same day, I made known the decree that precedes to Juan Baptista Richard. I attest,

[modern, circled, in pencil] 3

[Signed:] Almonester

Notary

[Rubric, Almonester]


[p. #4] [dig.9]


[blank]


[p. #5] [dig.10]


[Marginal note:] 

I present  [for] the party, expressing [that he does] not to know [how to] sign. 15th of January of 1774 I attest, 

[Signed:] Almonester
Notary
[Rubric, Almonester]


[Body:] 

4-
Juan Baptista Richard in the actions taken against Joseph Roth [Rou] concerning the deception with which had occurred in the sale of a *negra* named Maria, with a *negrita*, her daughter of the same name, and for the rest today I state that the lawsuit was filed, and yethe [Rou] is from abroad and [only]his family lives here at Manchac Post, [and] of course I wish not to be in a situation in which I subject to harm amidst delays, [so that] if it serves [Your Lordship] order, extricated [without any problems], the written subpoena to the commander of the said postso that he can force the aforementioned Roth [Rou] appear in this court by himself or under your authority, as in the manner provided under the law for this cause, thusly.To Your Lordship, I beg you serve and provide what I ask with due Justice, and I swear as is necessary, etc. As requested, within fifteen days after the notification has been made by any qualified person.

[Rubric, Unzaga]     [Rubric, Odoardo de Sayas]

Thus ordered: [By] the Lord *Don* Luis de


[p. #6] [dig.11]


Unzagay y Amezaga, Brigadier [General] of the Royal Armies, Governor General of this Province by His Majesty, which is signed with the Advisor General on [the] 15th of January of seventeen-hundred seventy four.

[Signed:] Andres Almonestér y Roxas, Notary Public

[Rubric, Almonester]

Notarized: On this same day, I made known the decree which precedes to Juan Baptista Richard. I attest,

[Signed:] Almonester


Notary

[Rubric, Almonester]

Authorized: the petition which was demanded and delivered to the party. I attest,

[Rubric, Almonester]

In the City of New Orleans, on [the] 9th of February of seventeen-hundred and seventy- four, I made known to the other side, to Joseph [Rou] in person. I attest,

[Signed:] Almonester

[Rubric, Almonester]
